# CSV

Laravel 5 package for reading and writing CSV files.

## Warning

**The package has been updated to PHP 7. If you can't update to PHP 7 use version 0.6.x**

## Instalation

Install package with composer

    composer require wilgucki/csv

For projects built with Laravel 5.5+ you can ommit next step. Package uses package discovery feature so you don't need
to modify config file. For older Laravel versions you will need to add service provider and aliases to
<code>config/app.php</code> file

    'providers' => [
        //... 
        Wilgucki\Csv\CsvServiceProvider::class,
    ]

    // ...

    'aliases' => [
        //...
        'CsvReader' => Wilgucki\Csv\Facades\Reader::class,
        'CsvWriter' => Wilgucki\Csv\Facades\Writer::class,
    ]

Last step is to publish package config

<code>php artisan vendor:publish --provider="Wilgucki\Csv\CsvServiceProvider"</code>

## Usage

### Config file

Package config can be found in csv.php file under config directory (after you have published it).
The file contains default values for delimiter, enclosure and escape parameters. You can set default values here
and skip passing additional parameters to open and create methods (we discuss them later).

#### Convert encoding

Common issue when working with CSV files generated by Excel is encoding. Excel exports CSV file encoded with
windows-1250 character set while most of PHP applications use UTF-8. To solve this issue you can set encoding option
in the config file. You can set your encoding preferences separately for reader and writer.

    'encoding' => [
        'reader' => [
            'enabled' => true,
            'from' => 'CP1250',
            'to' => 'UTF-8'
        ],
        'writer' => [
            'enabled' => true,
            'from' => 'UTF-8',
            'to' => 'CP1250'
        ]
    ]

As you can see in the example above, Reader will convert windows-1250 encoding to UTF-8, while Writer will do this
in opposite way. You don't have to use both options. You can set encoding conversion only for one class - reader
or writer.

### Reader

Start with opening CSV file.

    $reader = CsvReader::open('/path/to/file.csv');

If you need to change delimiter, enclosure or escape you can do it by passing proper values to <code>open</code> method.
More information about these values can be found here - [http://php.net/manual/en/function.fgetcsv.php](http://php.net/manual/en/function.fgetcsv.php).

    $reader = CsvReader::open('/path/to/file.csv', ';', '\'', '\\\\');

Having your CSV file opened you can read it line after line

    while (($line = $reader->readLine()) !== false) {
        print_r($line);
    }

or you could read whole file at once

    print_r($reader->readAll());

If your CSV file contains header line, you can convert it into array keys for each line.

    $reader = CsvReader::open($file, ';');
    $header = $reader->getHeader();
    print_r($header);
    print_r($reader->readAll());

Don't forget to close file after you're done with your work.

    $reader->close();

## Writer

Create new CSV file
    
    $writer = CsvWriter::create('/path/where/your/file/will/be/saved.csv');

File path is optional. If you won't provide it CsvWriter will use memory as a storege.

If you need to change delimiter, enclosure or escape you can do it by passing proper values to <code>create</code> method.
More information about these values can be found here - [http://php.net/manual/en/function.fputcsv.php](http://php.net/manual/en/function.fputcsv.php).

    $writer = CsvWriter::create('/path/to/file.csv', ';', '\'', '\\\\');

To add data into CSV file you can use <code>writeLine</code> or <code>writeAll</code> methods.

    $writer->writeLine(['some', 'data']);
    $writer->writeLine(['another', 'line']);
    
    $writer->writeAll([
        ['some', 'data'],
        ['another', 'line'],
    ]);

To display data added to CSV file use flush method.

    echo $writer->flush();

Don't forget to close file after you're done with your work.

    $writer->close();

## Integrating with Eloquent models

If you want/need to integrate CsvReader and/or CsvWriter with Eloquent model there's a simple way of doing this.
The Csv package provides three traits in order to simplify the process.

**These traits hasn't been tested for handling relations. Relations are still on a TODO list**

### CsvCustomCollection

CsvCustomCollection trait added to model class enables <code>toCsv</code> method that can be used on a collection.

    use Wilgucki\Csv\Traits\CsvCustomCollection;
    
    class SomeModel extends Model
    {
        use CsvCustomCollection;
        
        //...
    }
    
    $items = SomeModel::all();
    $csvData = $items->toCsv();

### CsvExportable

CsvExportable trait allows you to convert single model object to CSV data.

    use Wilgucki\Csv\Traits\CsvExportable;
    
    class SomeModel extends Model
    {
        use CsvExportable;
        
        //...
    }
    
    $csvData = SomeModel::find(1)->toCsv();

### CsvImportable

CsvImportable trait allows you to import data from CSV file and save it to the database. Imported file must have header
line containing column names as they are named in database table. Primary key must be named **id**. CSV importer will
update all rows with matching ids and add every row that isn't found in a table.

Each column from CSV file is checked against <code>$fillable</code> array, letting to insert or update only these
columns that are present in it.

    use Wilgucki\Csv\Traits\CsvImportable;
    
    class SomeModel extends Model
    {
        use CsvImportable;
        
        //...
    }
    
    SomeModel::fromCsv('/path/to/file.csv');

## Command line

### csv:import

To import CSV file into database table, use csv:import command.

<code>php artisan csv:import model csv-file</code>

- model - model class name with its namespace
- csv-file - file name with path relative to project's root directory

If you would like to import users, you could use command like this (remember to use correct CSV file path)

<code>php artisan csv:import "App\User" storage/users.csv</code>

### csv:export

This command allows you to export data from database table into CSV file.

<code>php artisan csv:export model csv-file</code>

- model - model's class name with its namespace
- csv-file - file name with path relative to project's root directory

If you would like to export users, you could use command like this (remember to use correct CSV file path)

<code>php artisan csv:export "App\User" storage/users.csv</code>

## TODO

- handle relations
